Introduction 

Sorting is the process of arranging elements in ascending or descending 
order. For example, when we play cards, we sort cards according to their 
value so that we can find the required card easily. 

When we go to some library, the books are arranged according to streams 
(Algorithm, Operating systems, Networking etc.). Sorting arranges data 
elements in order so that searching become easier. When books are 
arranged in proper indexing order, then it is easy to find a book we are 
looking for. 

This chapter discusses algorithms for sorting an array of items. 
Understanding sorting algorithms are the first step towards understanding 
algorithm analysis. Many sorting algorithms are developed and analyzed. 

Sorting algorithms like Bubble-Sort, Insertion-Sort and Selection-Sort are 
easy to implement and are suitable for the small input set. However, for 
large dataset they are slow. Sorting algorithms like Merge-Sort, Quick-Sort 
and Heap-Sort are some of the algorithms that are suitable for sorting large 
dataset. However, they are overkill if we want to sort a small dataset. 

Some other algorithms are there to sort a huge data set that cannot be 
stored in memory completely, for which external sorting technique is 
developed. 

Before we start a discussion of the various algorithms one by one. First, we 
should look at comparison function that is used to compare two values. 

Less function will return true if value1 is less than value2 otherwise it will 
return false. 

	private static bool less(int value1, int value2)
	{ 
		return value1 < value2;
	} 

More function will return true if value1 is greater than value2 otherwise it 
will return false. 

	private static bool more(int value1, int value2)
	{ 
		return value1 > value2;
	} 

The value in various sorting algorithms is compared using one of the above 
functions and it will be swapped depending upon the return value of these 
functions. If more() comparison function is used, then sorted output will be 
increasing in order and if less() is used then resulting output will be in 
descending order. 

Types of Sorting

Internal Sorting: All the elements can be read into memory at the same time 
and sorting is performed in memory. 

1. Selection-Sort
2. Insertion-Sort
3. Bubble-Sort
4. Quick-Sort
5. Merge-Sort

External Sorting: In this type of sorting, the dataset is so big that it is 
impossible to load the whole dataset into memory so sorting is done in 
chunks. 
1. Merge-Sort